 Are ye Christians? We were;
 If ye will swear (all of you) by the
merits of the Saviour, that ye are no pirates, nor have shed blood,
lawfully, nor unlawfully within forty days past, you may have licence
to come on land. We were all ready to take that oath.
 My Lord would
have you know, that it is not of pride, or greatness, that he cometh
not aboard your ship; but for that in your answer you declare that you
have many sick amongst you, he was warned by the Conservator of Health
of the city that he should keep a distance.
 We were his humble servants; and accounted
for great honour, and singular humanity towards us, that which was
already done; but hoped well, that the nature of the sickness of our
men was not infectious.
 By the name of Jesus, and his merits:
 He must not be twice paid for one labour:
 He came to conduct us to the
Strangers' House; and that he had prevented the hour, because we might
have the whole day before us, for our business.  For, if
you will follow my advice, there shall first go with me some few of
you, and see the place, and how it may be made convenient for you; and
then you may send for your sick, and the rest of your number, which ye
will bring on land. That this care, which
he took of desolate strangers, God would reward.
 He was but our servant, and our guide.
 What number of
persons we were?  And how many sick? We were in all,
(sick and whole,) one and fifty persons, whereof our sick were
seventeen.
 
Then he led us to a long gallery, like a dorture, where he showed us
all along the one side (for the other side was but wall and window),
seventeen cells, very neat ones, having partitions of cedar wood.
Which gallery and cells, being in all forty, (many more than we needed,
) were instituted as an infirmary for sick persons.  And he told us
withal, that as any of our sick waxed well, he might be removed from
his cell, to a chamber; for which purpose there were set forth ten
spare chambers, besides the number we spake of before.  This done, he
brought us back to the parlour, and lifting up his cane a little, (as
they do when they give any charge or command) said to us, 
   We gave him thanks, with all affection and respect, and said,
   We offered him also twenty
pistolets; but he smiled, and only said;   And so
he left us.

Soon after our dinner was served in; which was right good viands, both
for bread and treat: better than any collegiate diet, that I have
known in Europe.  We had also drink of three sorts, all wholesome and
good; wine of the grape; a drink of grain, such as is with us our ale,
but more clear: And a kind of cider made of a fruit of that country; a
wonderful pleasing and refreshing drink.  Besides, there were brought
in to us, great store of those scarlet oranges, for our sick; which
(they said) were an assured remedy for sickness taken at sea.  There
was given us also, a box of small gray, or whitish pills, which they
wished our sick should take, one of the pills, every night before
sleep; which (they said) would hasten their recovery.

The next day, after that our trouble of carriage and removing of our
men and goods out of our ship, was somewhat settled and quiet, I
thought good to call our company together; and when they were
assembled, said unto them; 
  and if they find them bad,
to banish us straightways; if good, to give us further time.  For
these men that they have given us for attendance, may withal have an
eye upon us.  Therefore for God's love, and as we love the weal of our
souls and bodies, let us so behave ourselves, as we may be at peace
with God, and may find grace in the eyes of this people.
 I am by office governor of this House of Strangers, and by
vocation I am a Christian priest: and therefore am come to you to
offer you my service, both as strangers and chiefly as Christians.
Some things I may tell you, which I think you will not be unwilling to
hear.  The State hath given you license to stay on land, for the space
of six weeks; and let it not trouble you, if your occasions ask
further time, for the law in this point is not precise; and I do not
doubt, but my self shall be able, to obtain for you such further time,
as may be convenient.  Ye shall also understand, that the Strangers'
House is at this time rich, and much aforehand; for it hath laid up
revenue these thirty-seven years; for so long it is since any stranger
arrived in this part: and therefore take ye no care; the State will
defray you all the time you stay; neither shall you stay one day the
less for that.  As for any merchandise ye have brought, ye shall be
well used, and have your return, either in merchandise, or in gold and
silver: for to us it is all one.  And if you have any other request to
make, hide it not.  For ye shall find we will not make your
countenance to fall by the answer ye shall receive.  Only this I must
tell you, that none of you must go above a karan,
 from the walls of the city, without especial
leave.
 That we could not tell what to
say: for we wanted words to express our thanks; and his noble free
offers left us nothing to ask.  It seemed to us, that we had before us
a picture of our salvation in Heaven; for we that were a while since
in the jaws of death, were now brought into a place, where we found
nothing but consolations.  For the commandment laid upon us, we would
not fail to obey it, though it was impossible but our hearts should be
enflamed to tread further upon this happy and holy ground.
 That our tongues should first cleave to the roofs of our mouths, ere
we should forget, either his reverend person, or this whole nation, in
our prayers.
 He was a priest, and looked for a priest's reward;
which was our brotherly love, and the good of our souls and bodies.
 That we were come into a land of angels, which did appear to us daily,
and prevent us with comforts, which we thought not of, much less
expected.
 That he was come to visit us;
  We of this island of
Bensalem, have this; that
by means of our solitary situation; and of the laws of secrecy, which
we have for our travellers, and our rare admission of strangers; we
know well most part of the habitable world, and are ourselves unknown.
Therefore because he that knoweth least is fittest to ask questions,
it is more reason, for the entertainment of the time, that ye ask me
questions, than that I ask you.
 That we humbly thanked him that he would give us leave
so to do: and that we conceived by the taste we had already, that
there was no worldly thing on earth, more worthy to be known than the
state of that happy land.  But above all, since that we
were met from the several ends of the world, and hoped assuredly that
we should meet one day in the kingdom of Heaven, (for that we were
both parts Christians,) we desired to know, (in respect that land was
so remote, and so divided by vast and unknown seas, from the land
where our Saviour walked on earth,) who was the apostle of that nation,
and how it was converted to the faith?
 Ye knit my
heart to you, by asking this question in the first place; for it
sheweth that you first seek the kingdom o f heaven; and I shall gladly,
and briefly, satisfy your demand.

 `LORD God of heaven and earth, thou hast vouchsafed of thy grace to
those of our order, to know thy works of Creation, and the secrets of
them: and to discern (as far as appertaineth to the generations o f
men) between divine miracles, works of nature, works of art, and
impostures and illusions of all sorts.  I do here acknowledge and
testify before this people, that the thing which we now see before our
eyes is thy Finger and a true Miracle.  And forasmuch as we learn in
our books that thou never workest miracles, but to d divine and
excellent end, (for the laws o f nature are thine own laws, and thou
exceedest them not but upon great cause,) we most humbly beseech thee
to prosper this great sign, and to give us the interpretation and use
of it in mercy; which thou dost in some part secretly promise by
sending it unto us.'

 `I, Bartholomew, a servant of the Highest, and Apostle of Jesus
Christ, was warned by an angel that appeareth to me, in a vision of
glory, that I should commit this ark to the floods of the sea.
Therefore I do testify and declare unto that people where God shall
ordain this ark to come to land, that in the same day is come unto
them salvation and peace and good-will, from the Father, and from the
Lord Jesus.'

   And here
he paused, and a messenger came, and called him from us.  So this was
all that passed in that conference.

The next day, the same governor came again to us, immediately after
dinner, and excused himself, saying; 
 
We answered, 
   He bowed himself a little to us, and after we
were set again, he said;  

One of our number said, after a little pause; that there was a matter,
we were no less desirous to know, than fearful to ask, lest we might
presume too far.  But encouraged by his rare humanity towards us,
(that could scarce think ourselves strangers, being his vowed and
professed servants,) we would take the hardiness to propound it:
humbly beseeching him, if he thought it not fit to be answered, that
he would pardon it, though he rejected it.  We said; 
 

At this speech the Governor gave a gracious smile, and said; 
   It was answered by us all, in all
possible humbleness, but yet with a countenance taking knowledge, that
we knew that he spake it but merrily, 
  but because we remembered, he had given a touch in
his former speech, that this land had laws of secrecy touching
strangers. You remember it aright and therefore in
that I shall say to you, I must reserve some particulars, which it is
not lawful for me to reveal; but there will be enough left, to give
you satisfaction.

 At that time, this land was known and frequented by the ships and
vessels of all the nations before named.  And (as it cometh to pass)
they had many times men of other countries, that were no sailors, that
came with them; as Persians, Chaldeans, Arabians; so as almost all
nations of might and fame resorted hither; of whom we have some stirps,
and little tribes with us at this day.  And for our own ships, they
went sundry voyages, as well to your straits, which you call the
Pillars of Hercules, as to other parts in the Atlantic and Mediterrane
Seas; as to Paguin, (which is the same with Cambaline,) and Quinzy,
upon the Oriental Seas, as far as to the borders of the East Tartary.

  there; and of the magnificent temple, palace, city,
and hill; and the manifold streams of goodly navigable rivers, (which
as so many chains environed the same site and temple); and the several
degrees of ascent, whereby men did climb up to the same, as if it had
been a scala coeli, be all poetical and fabulous: yet so much is true,
that the said country of Atlantis, as well that of Peru, then called
Coya, as that of Mexico, then named Tyrambel, were mighty and proud
kingdoms in arms, shipping and riches: so mighty, as at one time (or
at least within the space of ten years) they both made two great
expeditions; they of Tyrambel through the Atlantic to the Mediterrane
Sea; and they of Coya through the South Sea upon this our island: and
for the former of these, which was into Europe, the same author
amongst you (as it seemeth) had some relation from the Egyptian priest
whom he cited.  For assuredly such a thing there was.  But whether it
were the ancient Athenians that had the glory of the repulse and
resistance of those forces, I can say nothing: but certain it is,
there never came back either ship or man from that voyage.  Neither
had the other voyage of those of Coya upon us had better fortune, if
they had not met with enemies of greater clemency.  For the king of
this island, (by name Altabin,) a wise man and a great warrior,
knowing well both his own strength and that of his enemies, handled
the matter so, as he cut off their land-forces from their ships; and
entoiled both their navy and their tamp with a greater power than
theirs, both by sea and land: arid compelled them to render themselves
without striking stroke and after they were at his mercy, contenting
himself only with their oath that they should no more bear arms
against him, dismissed them all in safety.

 So as marvel you not at the thin population of America, nor at the
rudeness and ignorance of the people; for you must account your
inhabitants of America as a young people; younger a thousand years, at
the least, than the rest of the world: for that there was so much time
between the universal flood and their particular inundation.  For the
poor remnant of human seed, which remained in their mountains, peopled
the country again slowly, by little and little; and being simple and
savage people, (not like Noah and his sons, which was the chief family
of the earth;) they were not able to leave letters, arts, and civility
to their posterity; and having likewise in their mountainous
habitations been used (in respect of the extreme cold of those
regions) to clothe themselves with the skins of tigers, bears, and
great hairy goats, that they have in those parts; when after they came
down into the valley, and found the intolerable heats which are there,
and knew no means of lighter apparel, they were forced to begin the
custom of going naked, which continueth at this day.  Only they take
great pride and delight in the feathers of birds; and this also they
took from those their ancestors of the mountains, who were invited
unto it by the infinite flights of birds that came up to the high
grounds, while the waters stood below.  So you see, by this main
accident of time, we lost our traffic with the Americans, with whom of,
all others, in regard they lay nearest to us, we had most commerce.

 There reigned in this land, about nineteen hundred years ago, a king,
whose memory of all others we most adore; not superstitiously, but as
a divine instrument, though a mortal man; his name was Solamona: and
we esteem him as the lawgiver of our nation.  This king had a large
heart, inscrutable for good; and was wholly bent to make his kingdom
and people happy.  He therefore, taking into consideration how
sufficient and substantive this land was to maintain itself without
any aid (at all) of the foreigner; being five thousand six hundred
miles in circuit, and of rare fertility of soil in the greatest part
thereof; and finding also the shipping of this country might be
plentifully set on work, both by fishing and by transportations from
port to port, and likewise by sailing unto some small islands that are
not far from us, and are under the crown and laws of this state; and,
recalling into his memory the happy and flourishing estate wherein
this land then was; so as it might be a thousand ways altered to the
worse, but scarce any one way to the better; thought nothing wanted to
his noble and heroical intentions, but only (as far as human foresight
might reach) to give perpetuity to that which was in his time so
happily established.  Therefore amongst his other fundamental laws of
this kingdom, he did ordain the interdicts and prohibitions which we
have touching entrance of strangers; which at that time (though it was
after the calamity of America) was frequent; doubting novelties, and
commixture of manners.  It is true, the like law against the admission
of strangers without licence is an ancient law in the kingdom of China,
and yet continued in use.  But there it is a poor thing; and hath
made them a curious, ignorant, fearful, foolish nation.  But our
lawgiver made his law of another temper.  For first, he hath preserved
all points of humanity, in taking order and making provision for the
relief of strangers distressed; whereof you have tasted.
 That king also, still desiring to join humanity and policy together;
and thinking it against humanity, to detain strangers here against
their wills, and against policy that they should return and discover
their knowledge of this estate, he took this course: he did ordain
that of the strangers that should be permitted to land, as many (at
all times) might depart as would; but as many as would stay should
have very good conditions and means to live from the state.  Wherein
he saw so far, that now in so many ages since the prohibition, we have
memory not of one ship that ever returned, and but of thirteen persons
only, at several times, that chose to return in our bottoms.  What
those few that returned may have reported abroad I know not.  But you
must think, whatsoever they have said could be taken whore they came
but for a dream.  Now for our travelling from henna into parts abroad,
our Lawgiver thought fit altogether to restrain it.  So is it not in
China.  For the Chinese sail where they will or can; which sheweth
that their lawn of keeping out strangers is a law of pusillanimity and
fear.  But this restraint of ours bath one only exception, which is
admirable; preserving the good which cometh by communicating with
strangers, and avoiding the hurt; and I will now open it to you.  And
here I shall seem a little to digress, but you will by and by find it
pertinent.

 But now to come to our present purpose.  When the king had forbidden
to all his people navigation into any part that was not under his
crown, he made nevertheless this ordinance; that every twelve years
there should be set forth, out of this kingdom two ships, appointed to
several voyages; That in either of these ships there should be a
mission of three of the Fellows or Brethren of Salomon's House; whose
errand was only to give us knowledge of the affairs and state of those
countries to which they were designed, and especially of the sciences,
arts, manufactures, and inventions of all the world; and withal to
bring unto us books, instruments, and patterns in every kind: That the
ships, after they had landed the brethren, should return; and that the
brethren should stay abroad till the new mission.  These ships are not
otherwise fraught, than with store of victuals, and good quantity of
treasure to remain with the brethren, for the buying of such things
and rewarding of such persons as they should think fit.  Now for me to
tell you how the vulgar sort of mariners are contained from being
discovered at land; and how they that must be put on shore for any
time, color themselves under the names of other nations; and to what
places these voyages have been designed; and what places of rendezvous
are appointed for the new missions; and the like circumstances of the
practique; I may not do it: neither is it much to your desire.  But
thus you see we maintain a trade not for gold, silver, or jewels; nor
for silks; nor for spices; nor any other commodity of matter; but only
for God's first creature, which was Light: to have light (I say) of
the growth of all parts of the world.
  to kiss the skirt of his tippet; but he would not
suffer us; and so took his leave.  But when it came once amongst our
people that the state used to offer conditions to strangers that would
stay, we had work enough to get any of our men to look to our ship;
and to keep them from going presently to the governor to crave
conditions.  But with much ado we refrained them, till we might agree
what course to take.

We took ourselves now for free men, seeing there was no danger of our
utter perdition; and lived most joyfully, going abroad and seeing what
was to be seen in the city and places adjacent within our tedder; and
obtaining acquaintance with many of the city, not of the meanest
quality; at whose hands we found such humanity, and such a freedom and
desire to take strangers as it were into their bosom, as was enough to
make us forget all that was dear to us in our own countries: and
continually we met with many things right worthy of observation and
relation: as indeed, if there be a mirror in the world worthy to hold
men's eyes, it is that country.

One day there were two of our company bidden to a Feast of the Family,
as they call it.  A most natural, pious, and reverend custom it is,
shewing that nation to be compounded of all goodness.  This is the
manner of it.  It is granted to any man that shall live to see thirty
persons descended of his body alive together, and all above three
years old, to make this feast which is done at the cost of the state.
The Father of the Family, whom they call the Tirsan, two days before
the feast, taketh to him three of such friends as he liketh to choose;
and is assisted also by the governor of the city or place where the
feast is celebrated; and all the persons of the family, of both sexes,
are summoned to attend him.  These two days the Tirsan sitteth in
consultation concerning the good estate of the family.  There, if
there be any discord or suits between any of the family, they are
compounded and appeased.  There, if any of the family be distressed or
decayed, order is taken for their relief and competent means to live.
There, if any be subject to vice, or take ill courses, they are
reproved and censured.  So likewise direction is given touching
marriages, and the courses of life, which any of them should take,
with divers other the like orders and advices.  The governor assisteth,
to the end to put in execution by his public authority the decrees
and orders of the Tirsan, if they should be disobeyed; though that
seldom needeth; such reverence and obedience they give to the order of
nature.  The Tirsan doth also then ever choose one man from among his
sons, to live in house with him; who is called ever after the Son of
the Vine.  The reason will hereafter appear.

On the feast day, the father or Tirsan cometh forth after divine
service into a large room where the feast is celebrated; which room
bath an half-pace at the upper end.  Against the wall, in the middle
of the half-pace, is a chair placed for him, with a table and carpet
before it.  Over the chair is a state, made round or oval, and it is
of ivy; an ivy somewhat whiter than ours, like the leaf of a silver
asp; but more shining; for it is green all winter.  And the state is
curiously wrought with silver and silk of divers colors, broiding or
binding in the ivy; and is ever of the work of some of the daughters
of the family; and veiled over at the top with a fine net of silk and
silver.  But the substance of it is true ivy; whereof, after it is
taken down, the friends of the family are desirous to have some leaf
or sprig to keep.

The Tirsan cometh forth with all his generation or linage, the males
before him, and the females following him; and if there be a mother
from whose body the whole linage is descended, there is a traverse
placed in a loft above on the right hand of the chair, with a privy
door, and a carved window of glass, leaded with gold and blue; where
she sitteth, but is not seen.  When the Tirsan is come forth, he
sitteth down in the chair; and all the linage place themselves against
the wall, both at his back and upon the return of the half-pace, in
order of their years without difference of sex; and stand upon their
feet.  When he is set; the room being always full of company, but well
kept and without disorder; after some pause, there cometh in from the
lower end of the room, a taratan (which is as much as an herald) and
on either side of him two young lads; whereof one carrieth a scroll of
their shining yellow parchment; and the other a cluster of grapes of
gold, with a long foot or stalk.  The herald and children are clothed
with mantles of sea-water green satin; but the herald's mantle is
streamed
 You have reason for to commend that excellent
institution of the Feast of the Family.  And indeed we have experience
that those families that are partakers of the blessing of that feast
do flourish and prosper ever after in an extraordinary manner.  But
hear me now, and I will tell you what I know.  You shall understand
that there is not under the heavens so chaste a nation as this of
Bensalem; nor so free from all pollution or foulness.  It is the
virgin of the world.  I remember I have read in one of your European
books, of an holy hermit amongst you that desired to see the Spirit of
Fornication; and there appeared to him a little foul ugly AEthiop.
But if he had desired to see the Spirit of Chastity of Bensalem, it
would have appeared to him in the likeness of a fair beautiful
Cherubin.  For there is nothing amongst mortal men more fair and
admirable, than the chaste minds of this people.  Know therefore, that
with them there are no stews, no dissolute houses, no courtesans, nor
anything of that kind.  Nay they wonder (with detestation) at you in
Europe, which permit such things.  They say ye have put marriage out
of office: for marriage is ordained a remedy for unlawful
concupiscence; and natural concupiscence seemeth as a spar to marriage.
But when men have at hand a remedy more agreeable to their corrupt
will, marriage is almost expulsed.  And therefore there are with you
seen infinite men that marry not, but chose rather a libertine and
impure single life, than to be yoked in marriage; and many that do
marry, marry late,, when the prime and strength of their years is past.
And when they do marry, what is marriage to them but a very bargain;
wherein is sought alliance, or portion, or reputation, with some
desire (almost indifferent) of issue; and not the faithful nuptial
union of man and wife, that was first instituted.  Neither is it
possible that those that have cast away so basely so much of their
strength, should greatly esteem children, (being of the same matter,)
as chaste men do.  So likewise during marriage, is the case much
amended, as it ought to be if those things were tolerated only for
necessity?  No, but they remain still as a very affront to marriage.
The haunting of those dissolute places, or resort to courtesans, are
no more punished in married men than in bachelors.  And the depraved
custom of change, and the delight in meretricious embracements, (where
sin is turned into art,) maketh marriage a dull thing, and a kind of
imposition or tax.  They hear you defend these things, as done to
avoid greater evils; as advoutries, deflowering of virgins, unnatural
lust, and the like.  But they say this is a preposterous wisdom; and
they call it Lot's offer, who to save his guests from abusing, offered
his daughters: nay they say farther that there is little gained in
this; for that the same vices and appetites do still remain and abound;
unlawful lust being like a furnace, that if you stop the flames
altogether, it will quench; but if you give it any.vent, it will rage.
As for masculine love, they have no touch of it; and yet there are
not so faithful and inviolate friendships in the world again as are
there; and to speak generally, (as I said before,) I have not read of
any such chastity, in any people as theirs.  And their usual saying is,
That whosoever is unchaste cannot reverence himself; and they say,
That the reverence of a man's self, is, next religion, the chiefest
bridle of all vices.
 That I would say to him, as the
widow of Sarepta said to Elias; that he was come to bring to memory
our sins; and that I confess the righteousness of Bensalem was greater
than the righteousness of Europe.
 They have also many wise and excellent laws touching marriage.  They
allow no polygamy.  They have ordained that none do intermarry or
contract, until a month be past from their first interview.  Marriage
without consent of parents they do not make void, but they mulct
 

And as we were thus in conference, there came one that seemed to be a
messenger, in a rich huke, that spake with the Jew: whereupon he
turned to me and said; 
   The next morning he came to me again, joyful as it seemed,
and said; 
   I thanked him, and told
him, I was most glad of the news.

The day being come, he made his entry.  He was a man of middle stature
and age, comely of person, and had an aspect as if he pitied men.  He
was clothed in a robe of fine black cloth, with wide sleeves and a
cape.  His under garment was of excellent white linen down to the foot,
girt with a girdle of the same; and a sindon or tippet of the same
about his neck.  He had gloves, that were curious,`' and set with
stone; and shoes of peach-coloured velvet.  His neck was bare to the
shoulders.  His hat was like a helmet, or Spanish montera; and his
locks curled below it decently: they were of colour brown.  His beard
was cut round, and of the same colour with his hair, somewhat lighter.
He was carried in a rich chariot without wheels, litter-wise; with
two horses at either end, richly trapped in blue velvet embroidered;
and two footmen on each side in the like attire.  The chariot was all
of cedar, gilt, and adorned with crystal; save that the fore-end had
panels of sapphires, set in borders of gold; and the hinder-end the
like of emeralds of the Peru colour.  There was also a sun of gold,
radiant, upon the top, in the midst; and on the top before, a small
cherub of gold, with wings displayed.  The chariot was covered with
cloth of gold tissued upon blue.  He had before him fifty attendants,
young men all, in white satin loose coats to the mid leg; and
stockings of white silk; and shoes of blue velvet; and hats of blue
velvet; with fine plumes of diverse colours, set round like hat-bands.
Next before the chariot, went two men, bare-headed, in linen garments
down the foot, girt, and shoes of blue velvet; who carried, the one a
crosier, the other a pastoral staff like a sheep-hook; neither of them
of metal, but the crosier of balm-wood, the pastoral staff of cedar.
Horsemen he had none, neither before nor behind his chariot: as it
seemeth, to avoid all tumult and trouble.  Behind his chariot went all
the officers and principals of the companies of the city.  He sat
alone, upon cushions of a kind of excellent plush, blue; and under his
foot curious carpets of silk of diverse colours, like the Persian, but
far finer.  He held up his bare hand as he went, as blessing the
people, but in silence.  The street was wonderfully well kept: so that
there was never any army had their men stand in better battle-array
than the people stood.  The windows likewise were not crowded, but
every one stood in them as if they had been placed.

When the shew was past, the Jew said to me; 
   Three days after
the Jew came to me again, and said; 
  the pages forth of the room, and caused me to sit down beside
him, and spake to me thus in the Spanish tongue.

 The end of our foundation is the knowledge of causes, and secret
motions of things; and the enlarging of the bounds of human empire, to
the effecting of all things possible.

 We have burials in several earths, where we put diverse cements, as
the Chineses do their porcellain.  But we have them in greater variety,
and some of them more fine.  We have also great variety of composts
 We have high towers; the highest about half a mile in height; and
some of them likewise set upon high mountains; so that the vantage of
the hill with the tower is in the highest of them three miles at least.
And these places we call the Upper Region; accounting the air
between the high places and the low, as a Middle Region.  We use these
towers, according to their several heights, and situations, for
insolation, refrigeration, conservation; and for the view of divers
meteors; as winds, rain, snow, hail; and some of the fiery meteors
also.  And upon them, in some places, are dwellings of hermits, whom
we visit sometimes, and instruct what to observe.

 We have also a number of artificial wells and fountains, made in
imitation of the natural sources and baths; as tincted upon
 We have also great and spacious houses where we imitate and
demonstrate meteors; as snow, hail, rain, some artificial rains of
bodies and not of water, thunders, lightnings; also generations of
bodies in air; as frogs, flies, and divers others.

 We have also fair and large baths, of several mixtures, for the cure
of diseases, and the restoring of man's body from arefaction: and
others for the confirming of it in strength of sinewes, vital parts,
and the very juice and substance of the body.

 We have also means to make divers plants rise by mixtures of earths
without seeds; and likewise to make divers new plants, differing from
the vulgar; and to make one tree or plant turn into another.

 We have also particular pools, where we make trials upon fishes, as
we have said before of beasts and birds.

 I will not hold you long with recounting of our brewhouses,
bake-houses, and kitchens, where are made divers drinks, breads, and
meats, rare and of special effects.  Wines we have of grapes; and
drinks of other juice of fruits, of grains, and of roots; and of
mixtures with honey, sugar, manna, and fruits dried, and decocted;
Also of the tears or woundings of trees; and of the pulp of canes.
And these drinks are of several ages, some to the age or last of forty
years.  We have drinks also brewed with several herbs, and roots, and
spices; yea with several fleshes, and white-meats; whereof some of the
drinks are such, as they are in effect meat and drink both: so that
divers, especially in age, do desire to live with them, with little or
no meat or bread.  And above all, we strive to have drink of extreme
thin parts, to insinuate into the body, and yet without all biting,
sharpness, or fretting; insomuch as some of them put upon the back of
your hand will, with a little stay, pass through to the palm, and yet
taste mild to the mouth.  We have also waters which we ripen in that
fashion, as they become nourishing; so that they are indeed excellent
drink; and.many will use no other.  Breads we have of several grains,
roots, and kernels; yea and some of flesh and fish dried; with divers
kinds of leavenings and seasonings: so that some do extremely move
appetites; some do nourish so, as divers do live of them, without any
other meat; who live very long.  So for meats, we have some of them so
beaten and made tender and mortified,' yet without all corrupting, as
a weak heat of the stomach will turn them into good chylus; as well as
a strong heat would meat otherwise prepared.  We have some meats also
and breads and drinks, which taken by men enable them to fast long
after; and some other, that used make the very flesh of men's bodies
sensibly' more hard and tough and their strength far greater than
otherwise it would be.

 We have also divers mechanical arts, which you have not; and stuffs
made by them; as papers, linen, silks, tissues; dainty works of
feathers of wonderful lustre; excellent dies, and, many others; and
shops likewise, as well for such as are not brought into vulgar use
amongst us as for those that are.  For you must know that of the
things before recited, many of them are grown into use throughout the
kingdom; but yet, if they did flow from our invention, we have of them
also for patterns and principals.

 We have also perspective-houses, where we make demonstrations of all
lights and radiations; and of all colours: and out of things
uncoloured and transparent, we can represent unto you all several
colours; not in rain-bows, (as it is in gems, and prisms,) but of
themselves single.  We represent also all multiplications of light,
which we carry to great distance, and make so sharp as to discern
small points and lines.  Also all colourations of light; all delusions
and deceits of the sight, in figures, magnitudes, motions, colours all
demonstrations of shadows.  We find also divers means, yet unknown to
you, of producing of light originally from divers bodies.  We procure
means of seeing objects afar off; as in the heaven and remote places;
and represent things near as afar off; and things afar off as near;
making feigned distances.  We have also helps for the sight, far above
spectacles and glasses in use.  We have also glasses and means to see
small and minute bodies perfectly and distinctly; as the shapes and
colours of small flies and worms, grains and flaws in gems, which
cannot otherwise be seen, observations in urine and blood not
otherwise to be seen.  We make artificial rain-bows, halo's, and
circles about light.  We represent also all manner of reflexions,
refractions, and multiplications' of visual beams of objects.

 We have also sound-houses, where we practise and demonstrate all
sounds, and their generation.  We have harmonies which you have not,
of quarter-sounds, and lesser slides of sounds.  Divers instruments of
music likewise to you unknown, some sweeter than any you have,
together with bells and rings that are dainty and sweet.  We represent
small sounds as great and deep; likewise great sounds extenuate and
sharp; we make divers tremblings and warblings of sounds, which in
their original are entire.  We represent and imitate all articulate
sounds and letters, and the voices and notes of beasts and birds.  We
have certain helps which set to the ear do further the hearing greatly.
We have also divers strange and artificial echoes, reflecting the
voice many times, and as it were tossing it: and some that give back
the voice louder than it came, some shriller, and some deeper; yea,
some rendering the voice differing in the letters or articulate sound
from that they receive.  We have also means to convey sounds in trunks
and pipes, in strange lines and distances.

 We have also engine-houses, where are prepared engines and
instruments for all sorts of motions.  There we imitate and practise
to make swifter motions than any you have, either out of your muskets
or any engine that you have: and to make them and multiply them more
easily, and with small force, by wheels and other means: and to make
them stronger and more violent than yours are; exceeding your greatest
cannons arid basilisks.  We represent also ordnance and instruments of
war, and engines of all kinds: and likewise new mixtures and
compositions of gun-powder, wild-fires burning in water, and
unquenchable.  Also fireworks of all variety both for pleasure and use.
We imitate also flights of birds; we have some degrees of flying in
the air.  We have ships and boats for going under water, and brooking
of seas; also swimming-girdles and supporters.  We have divers curious
clocks, and other like motions of return: and some perpetual motions.
We imitate also motions of living creatures, by images, of men, beasts,
birds, fishes, and serpents.  We have also a great number of other
various motions, strange for equality, fineness, and subtilty.

 We have also houses of deceits of the senses; where we represent all
manner of feats of juggling, false apparitions, impostures, and
illusions; and their fallacies.  And surely you will easily believe
that we that have so many things truly natural which induce admiration,
could in a world of particulars deceive the senses, if we would
disguise those things and labour to make them seem more miraculous.
But we do hate all impostures, and lies; insomuch as we have severely
forbidden it to all our fellows, under pain of ignominy and fines,
that they do not show any natural work or thing, adorned or swelling;
but only pure as it is, and without all affectation of strangeness.

 For the several employments and offices of our fellows; we have
twelve that sail into foreign countries, under the names of other
nations, (for our own we conceal); who bring us the books, and
abstracts, and patterns of experiments of all other parts.  These we
call Merchants of Light.

 We have three that collect the experiments of all mechanical arts;
and also of liberal sciences; and also of practices which are not
brought into arts.  These we call Mystery-men.

 We have three that draw the experiments of the former four into
titles and tables, to give the better light for the drawing of
observations and axioms out of them.  These we call Compilers.

 Then after divers meetings and consults of our whole number, to
consider of the former labours and collections, we have three that
take care, out of them, to direct new experiments, of a higher light,
more penetrating into nature than the former.  These we call Lamps.

 Lastly, we have three that raise the former discoveries by
experiments into greater observations, axioms, and aphorisms.  These
we call Interpreters of Nature.

 For our ordinances and rites: we have two very long and fair
galleries: in one of these we place patterns and samples of all manner
of the more rare and excellent inventions in the other we place the
statues of all principal inventors.  There we have the statue of your
Columbus, that discovered the West Indies: also the inventor of ships:
your- monk that was the inventor of ordnance and of gunpowder: the
inventor of music: the inventor of letters: the inventor of printing:
the inventor of observations of astronomy: the inventor of works in
metal: the inventor of glass: the inventor of silk of the worm: the
inventor of wine: the inventor of corn and bread: the inventor of
sugars: and all these, by more certain tradition than you have.  Then
have we divers inventors of our own, of excellent works; which since
you have not seen, it were too long to make descriptions of them; and
besides, in the right understanding of those descriptions you might
easily err.  For upon every invention of value, we erect a statue to
the inventor, and give him a liberal and honourable reward.  These
statues are some of brass; some of marble and touch-stone; some of
cedar and other special woods gilt and adorned; some of iron; some of
silver; some of gold.

 Lastly, we have circuits or visits of divers principal cities of the
kingdom; where, as it cometh to pass, we do publish such new
profitable inventions as we think good.  And we do also declare
natural divinations of diseases, plagues, swarms-of hurtful creatures,
scarcity, tempests, earthquakes, great inundations, comets,
temperature of the year, and divers other things; and we give counsel
thereupon, what the people shall do for the prevention and remedy of
them.
 God
bless thee, my son; and God bless this relation, which I have made.  I
give thee leave to publish it for the good of other nations; for we
here are in God's bosom, a land unknown.
 The New Atlantis
